# Computing Parameters Analytically

## Normal Equation

Gradient descent gives one way of minimizing $J$. Let's discuss a second way of doing so, this time performing the minimization explicity and without resorting to an iterative algorithm. In the "Normal Equation" method, we will minimize $J$ by explicitly taking its derivatives with respect to the $\theta_j$'s, and setting them to zero. This allows us to find the optimum theta without iteration. The normal equation formula is given below:

$$
\theta=(X^T X)^{-1} X^T y
$$

There is **no need** to do feature scaling with the normal equation.

The following is a comparison of gradient descent and the normal equation:

| Gradient Descent | Normal Equation |
| ------ | ------ |
| Needs to choose $alpha$ | No need to choose $\alpha$ |
| Needs many iterations | No need to iterate |
| $\mathcal{O}(kn^2)$ | $\mathcal{O}(n^3)$, need to calculate inverse of $X^T X$ |
| Works well when n is large | Slow if n is very large |

With the normal equation, computing the inversion has complexity $\mathcal{O}(n^3)$. So if we have a very large number of features, the normal equation will be slow. In practice, when n exceeds 10,000 it might be a good time to go from a normal solution to an iterative process.

## Normal Equation Noninvertibility

When implementing the normal equation in octave we want to use the 'pinv' function rather than 'inv.' The 'pinv' function will give you a value of $\theta$ even if $X^TX$ is not invertible.

If $X^TX$ is **noninvertible**, the common causes might be having :

* Redundant features, where two features are very closely related (i.e. they are linearly dependent)

* Too many features (e.g. $m ≤ n$). In this case, delete some features or use "regularization".

Solutions to the above problems include deleting a feature that is linearly dependent with another or deleting one or more features when there are too many features.
